Introduction to the Cryptographic Protocol/Standard

	Cryptography can be defined as using complex method and protocols to encapsulate a piece of information transporting between communication points in order to protect its integrity. Some scenarios that may involve the use of cryptography includes military communication, bank transfers and private messaging.  Cryptography consist of many types of protocol and standard, in this report I have selected two types of standard to be discuss. The cryptographic concept that I have chosen is Advanced Encryption Standard(AES) and Secure Hash Algorithm(SHA-1).
AES originated from Rijndale cipher which is created by two Belgian cryptographer named Vincent Rijmen and Joan Daemen (NY times,2000). Before Advanced encryption standard was created there was a previous predecessor named Data encryption standard which is less complex. Ever since then AES has been used by the United states government and is now renowned worldwide.
” In January 1997 the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) initiated the search for a replacement for the Data Encryption Standard(DES) “.”Rijndael, developed by Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen was a popular choice to become the AES” (Dobbertin,, Rijmen,. Sowa,1997)
.Secure hash algorithm is a type of hash algorithm, it is designed by the United states National security agency(NSA) and they considered it as a Federal Information Processing Standard(FIPS) which means the standard are used by the military and government agencies. In general, the way hash algorithm works is by obtaining the bit size of the data and combine it with a fixed bit size which mean hash function will be a one-way conversion. A reason why secure hash algorithm is so much more superior compare to the another cryptographic standard is because every hash will be unique and even with a single bit in the message is change the hash will change entirely.
“All of the algorithms are  iterative,  one-way  hash functions  that  can  process  a  message  to  produce  a  condensed  representation  called  a message digest. Any change to the message will, with a very high probability, result in a different message digest.” (National Institute of Standards and Technology,2012)

Depth analysis of the two protocols/standards.	

Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)
	AES architecture is based on a cipher technique called block cipher and AES also use a sequence of mathematic operations that are chain together called substitution permutation network to produce its cipher text. Firstly, block cipher operates by group every word to bit which is call a block, then the block will shift a certain number based on the user’s input. Block cipher by itself only allow the encryption of a single block of fixed length data. Thus, there are available modes of operation to fix the size of data getting encrypted and produce a proper cipher text. AES also needs to be specify the length of data and the length of the key the user desired to be encrypted for example 128bit , 192bit or 256 bit.

Modes of operation
Block cipher modes of operation includes Electronic Code Block(ECB) which will separate connected blocks of message to independent section of blocks for encryption. The problem with ECB is, it will fill in the last few blocks with padding and it will make it easy to identify the length of the message, making it much more simple to brute force. Another type of block cipher mode of operation is Cipher Block Chaining (CBC) which every block of plaintext is XORed with the last cipher text block until the end of the plaintext, usually an initialization vector will be specify in the first block in order to make the encryption more complex. Counter(CTR) is the last operation, CTR works by turning a block cipher into a stream. It generates the next keystream block by counting the next value in the stream. When AES is getting implemented user can choose one of the operation for example AES-192/CTR, AES-128/CBC, AES-256/ECB.

Rounds steps
Substitution-permutation is used to mix up mechanism function by having two boxes call substation boxes and permutation box interchanging multiple rounds in order to produce a final cipher text block. The length of the key dictates how many rounds of cipher it repeats for. For example a 128bit key will have 10 rounds,192bit key will have 12 rounds and 256bit key will have 14 rounds.
The first step of the round is SubBytes ,subbyte is a substitution step where each byte is replaced with another according to a s-box,the s-box does its calculation by having a matrix multiplication inverse combine with an irreversibleble affine transformation .For example A0 —> D0.The next step of AES cipher round is Shiftrow  the role of this step is to have the S-box shift its row based on the number of offset .Each byte of the second row shifted once to the left, the third row shifted twice and the forth row shifted three times .The last step of the AES round is called the MixColumn ,  the role of mix column is to take four byte from the s-box and output a different four byte with the help of a math calculation called linear transformation.(Hans Dobbertin, Vincent Rijmen, Aleksandra. Sowa,2004) Key scheduling
	As stated from previous description the number of rounds perform is dependent on the length of the key , in the section it shows how the length of the key can affect the number of rounds .The way the rounds are calculated is to have a round key and the way round keys are calculated are firstly to expand the key by computing from the AES key, an expanded key of length equal to the message block length multiplied by the number of rounds.The next part of the process is Round key selection which is to extract 128-bit round keys from the Expanded Key and generate the round key.


